---
title: 'Lessons from Year 1 of My PhD'
date: 2025-08-21
permalink: /posts/2025/08/first-year-lessons/
tags:
---
I have just wrapped up the first year of my PhD! It was a year of immense learning and growth — both in my research and also on a personal level. I have been doing some reflecting, and I wanted to document some of the lessons I learned in my first year on my blog. Some of these lessons might seem obvious or cliché, but I want to emphasize them because they were important in my first year! This is mostly for myself to look back on, but I also hope it can help anyone reading as well! 

I can’t believe these are all from my first year; I am excited to keep learning and growing throughout my PhD and in my career as a researcher. If you’re reading this and have other pieces of advice that were pivotal to your journey, feel free to reach out to me! It is important for us as a scientific community to be strong, uplift each other, and support each other.

With no further ado (and in no particular order), here are some lessons from my first year as a PhD student:

### 1. Just because you can doesn’t mean you should. 
This advice is from my advisor. In research, there are so many potential avenues to go down! While a lot of them are alluring and exciting, you have to think through what makes the most sense for pursuing and what projects are most cohesive with your future plans. When trying to decide on the focus of my thesis research, I had several potential ideas that were very interesting to me. However, the ultimate choice should be something that you can build upon and hopefully base future research on. There are a lot of side-quest questions that can be fun, but those might be a one-and-done project. The side-quest projects can be great for more senior researchers who are more established and have more flexibility, but for young researchers just starting their careers, it is usually better to focus on questions that can be expanded. Every pursuit takes time, which is a limited resource. Therefore, you have to choose! Even if you can do it, it doesn’t mean you should. With that being said, definitely keep those other ideas in the queue, since you can always choose to explore them later!

### 2. Start with a big question that you can see your career going toward. 
This is also a piece of advice I picked up from my professor, as well as older grad students in my lab. In academia, it’s important to establish your area of expertise earlier on if you can. A good way to find that is to start with a big, broad question that really interests you. Then, you can build smaller projects under the umbrella of that question. Of course, your area of research can change later on (I have learned it’s actually quite common to shift areas throughout your career), but the early stage of being a researcher is smoother if you identify an area to focus on sooner.

### 3. Each person has a unique journey in academia, so try not to compare. 
A phrase I always come back to is “comparison is the thief of joy.” Like in many areas of life, comparing your journey or progress to someone else’s is a slippery slope for mental health and self-esteem. Of course, it is okay to be inspired and look up to others, but everyone’s journey is different. No two trajectories will be the same and that is okay! Everyone is coming from slightly different backgrounds and has different working styles. I recently read _The Freedom of Self-Forgetfulness_ by Tim Keller. In this book, Keller argues that the true path to freedom from comparison and pride is to not compare yourself to others or even yourself. When we compare to others, we can feel less-than or an overdue sense of pride (depending on if you’re upward or downward comparing). Even comparing to yourself can lead to disappointment when you don’t reach certain expectations you have for yourself. This book is written from a Christian perspective, so Keller argues that if you focus on your faith and the way God loves you (i.e., being self-forgetful) you’ll find freedom. During my first year, I struggled a little bit with comparison and imposter syndrome. This was an encouraging read for me and helped me on my journey!

### 4. Grad school is a marathon, not a sprint. 
When I started my PhD, I was eager to hit the ground running. I wanted to start projects right away, start writing manuscripts, apply to fellowships, do lots of outreach, etc. I wanted to do allll the things. I realized though that these things take time. Duh! Somehow I expected myself to magically do everything in a short timespan. A couple months in, I felt a little disappointed in myself when things weren’t progressing as fast as I expected them to initially. However, I realized there were other things I needed to take care of first. I needed to create a solid research plan. I needed to ensure my research was quality work and not rushed. I needed to make the right connections and find outreach that was right for me. I realized it was slightly unrealistic to expect everything to fall into place right away. I learned it is more important to establish a strong foundation than to dive into things right away without much planning and thought. Rather, continual effort day by day is the most sustainable way to keep moving forward. Even though I worried I wasn’t doing enough (the imposter syndrome kicking in), I later realized I was doing just fine and that my small steps each day were adding up. While I didn’t get the dreamy start I imagined, it was still a strong start, just in a different way.

### 5. Your advisor is one of the most important parts of your graduate school experience. 
When applying to programs and labs, I was told to prioritize having an advisor that was a good fit. Having an advisor that encourages you, pushes you just the right amount, who is understanding when life happens, and who meshes well with your personality and work style is crucial. Your advisor can make or break your grad school experience. Since grad school involves a close working partnership between the student and advisor, it’s important for it to be a healthy, positive dynamic. I have heard from other students that part of the reason their PhD was really negative was their advisor; if their advisor was overly critical and harsh, it would obviously affect their well-being. I’m really grateful I took the time to find an advisor who was a good match for me. Part of the reason my first year was so positive was because of my advisor! Very happy with my choice of lab.

### 6. It is nice to have an advisor who will let you explore your own research questions. 
While this isn’t possible in all labs depending on if you’re assigned to an ongoing project, if you have funding support for something specific, or other extenuating circumstances, it is liberating to be able to design your own project and pursue research that truly interests you. Deciding on which research ideas to pursue when you are left with an open-ended path is also an important skill to develop (see advice #1). I am really grateful that my advisor gave me the freedom to choose what I my dissertation will focus on. Even though it took time for me to decide (and it is still a work in progress), I was able to explore several areas of research I found interesting, then choose from there. Now I am truly excited about the work I am doing! 

### 7. Related to the last point (and point #4)…Don’t rush into settling on a research area.
It is okay to take time to find a research area and projects that truly excite you. Finding an area of focus involves reading a lot of research literature, talking to others to spark ideas, and chats with your advisor. The first ideas are not necessarily the best ones. Instead of pigeon-holing yourself into the first idea that comes to mind, it’s okay to keep exploring and come up with other options. Part of me was tempted to start the first research projects I thought of because I really wanted to get started and begin producing work. I’m glad my advisor encouraged me to take my time to decide on my projects.

### 8. Some things are out of your control; keep doing your best work and working toward your goals.
This past year, there was some unsettling uncertainty in research and academia. Research funding has been slashed, grants have been paused, fellowships have been discontinued, and the “normalcy” of academia felt like it was in shambles at times. However, my advisor told me to just keep going and to keep doing my best work. It doesn’t help to get completely caught up in the chaos and be paralyzed by news instead of making progress. Yes, it is important to stay informed, but keep putting in your best work, with the hope that everything will work out. That way, when things _are_ sorted out (or if there was only a fear of things going wrong but they didn't), you’ll have been working the whole time and have some strong research ready.

### 9. It is important to have hobbies and a life outside of research to maintain a healthy lifestyle. 
I know, what a revolutionary concept! Music and reading have always been my go-to activities outside of research. I am really grateful to have these hobbies to turn to when I need to give my mind a break. I also love being outdoors, exploring LA, and hanging out with friends. Doing other things you love is really important for longevity and refreshes your mind to keep doing strong research.

### 10. Discomfort is the primary driver of growth.
Through discomfort, you grow and get better. This is really cliché, I know. Good things often take time. Even though there might be hesitancy to undertake new skills because of steep learning curves, the only option is to face it head-on. For me, I get excited about the prospect of learning a new skill and think of the satisfaction I’ll have when I can do it. 

### 11. Finding community is critical. 
I moved to LA not really knowing anyone, but I’m really grateful for the community I built up in the past year. I was able to find community in my lab, my program, my church, through orchestra, friends of friends, and more. It’s important to have people to share life with and I am thankful for my support system. My communities greatly boost my well-being and add so much value to my life as a PhD student.

### 12. Find a working style that works best for _you_.
For the past few years, I have really wanted to be a morning person. I’ve tried numerous times to reset my schedule to be an early riser. However, naturally my chronotype is to stay up late and get up a little later. Thankfully, my research and work lends itself to me setting my own schedule for the most part. I acknowledge this isn’t the same for everyone or for all fields, so disregard this if it doesn’t apply to you. Now that I have accepted I’m a night owl (at least for now), I work with my natural energy levels instead of against them.

### 13. Choose your housing strategically and plan ahead how you will get to campus easily. 
In a city as big as LA, there are a lot of logistics around housing. I knew I didn't want to live _right_ next to campus, because I wanted at least a little distance between home and school. I looked into a few different neighborhoods that were a reasonable distance from campus and in the end, I’m glad I picked my current area because it is convenient. I can ride public transit, take the USC shuttle bus, or drive. It is good to be able to have these options and flexibility. Other neighborhoods I was looking into don’t have as many transportation options or they are more inconvenient (like having to get on the interstate with risk of traffic or transferring buses a lot).

### 14. Time goes by quickly (which can be good or bad depending on how you want to frame it!) 
Depending on the day and my mood, my stance on this fact changes. My first year flew by when I look back on it as a whole. Even on a daily basis, sometimes I get so engrossed in work that I forget how much time has gone by. This passage of time can be frustrating when you have so much you want to fit in. However, the way it passes by quickly is also kind of consoling. PhD programs are typically 5 to 6 years, which sounds like a long time. Whenever someone asks me how much longer I’ll be in school, I sheepishly have to say four more years. To outsiders, it sounds like a long time to continue school. Even though I love school and learning, there is the excitement of post-PhD life and the things to come. While I don't want to wish away this critical period of time, it is somewhat reassuring to think about this being a phase of my life that will pass by (in the grand scheme of things) somewhat quickly. I won’t always be living the grad school life. This is reassuring but it also makes me want to savor and use my time wisely while I’m here!

### 15. Get advice from older students and ask for program-specific tips. 
I’m really grateful for the community I have in my program. Since my program is relatively small, it has been somewhat to meet and chat with everyone. It’s been great hearing about their experiences in research and in the program. They have learned things along the way and have lots of wisdom to share. For example, how the taxes work as a grad student, tips for my screening exam, when to do the qualifying exam, how to choose a thesis committee, what classes and professors to take, and more. Make sure to consult the more senior students in your program!

### 16. Find funding opportunities (especially smaller pockets of money). 
Since starting my PhD, I have seen firsthand the importance of FUNDING. Of course, I had heard about this before starting my PhD, but seeing it firsthand has made it sink in even more. PhD isn’t just about research; it’s about getting funding and support to actually do the research, share the research, and build a career in academia. A considerable portion of a researcher’s time is spent finding and applying for financial support. During my first year, I especially realized the helpfulness of small pockets of money. Yes, there are the larger internal and external fellowships that can fund you as a researcher and your dissertation research. The smaller pockets of money though can support things like travel for conferences and supplies for pilot research. At USC this year, I was able to get some funding from WiSE and USC Dornsife PhD Academy in order to attend conferences, which was really helpful so I didn't have to worry about how to make those happen. 

### 17. Go to conferences, seminars, talks, and meetings to build your academic community. 
While at these events, try to put yourself out there and meet people. I love hearing about people’s research and their journeys. Honestly one of my favorite parts of research is being part of the larger academic community. I have enjoyed getting to go to conferences, seminar talks, and lunches with guest speakers to get to know more people in my field. Especially in my fields of evolutionary biology/biological anthropology/evolutionary medicine/human health, you start to know the networks and see how everyone is connected.

### 18. Grad school is NOT a continuation of undergrad! 
I’ve had to explain this to family and friends multiple times, since there is some unfamiliarity around what a PhD program entails. If anything, my PhD has felt more like a flexible job (with a bit of classwork on the side). For most PhD programs in the U.S., students earn a stipend for their research and teaching efforts. While it isn’t an exorbitant amount of money, it’s still a monthly income which makes it feel like a job. And bonus, you earn your PhD along the way! When I tell people I am getting my PhD, a lot of people mention that they can’t imagine going to school for five more years; they’re tired of taking classes and ready to be done. PhD programs are not like undergrad where you’re taking 4-5 classes, juggling extracurriculars, hanging out with a huge circle of friends, getting lunch and dinner every night at the dining hall, etc. Most of my days are spent doing research, and classes consume a marginal part of my weekly schedule. I’m only in 0-2 classes at a time, and typically they don’t involve a lot of work outside of class. In fact, my advisor encourages me not to overload my schedule with classes but to focus on research and learning skills outside of a classroom setting. So yes, even though grad school is labeled “school,” it’s not like school in the traditional sense of taking classes and studying non-stop.

### 19. Choose a program in a city you enjoy if possible! 
In grad school, it is important to have a semblance of work-life balance so you don’t burn out. In my free time, I have loved exploring LA and all it has to offer. There are sooo many things to do here, so the options are endless. The food is also amazing, which makes even getting meals an exciting adventure. I am grateful that my program is in a city with so much to do. It really helps the quality of life during grad school to have a larger community and options of things to do.

### 20. Learn about basic personal finance principles, budget, and track expenses. 
I am a huge advocate for having control over your personal finances to improve whatever situation you find yourself in. Having a budget and tracking expenses can be helpful for grad students who are working with a limited income. Budgeting doesn’t have to be overly restrictive; you can plan for what you enjoy spending money on and set realistic amounts. Being aware of your spending habits can keep you on track for meeting your financial goals and give you peace of mind. When I was first learning about personal finances, I really enjoyed J.L. Collin’s’ book _The Simple Path to Wealth_. Collins explains principles clearly and simply. I realized that personal finance doesn’t have to be overly complicated.
